LOCATION SHANGLAND              OR

Established Series
Rev. WEL/TDT
01/2023

SHANGLAND SERIES

The Shangland series consists of moderately deep, well
drained soils on hills.  They formed in residuum and
colluvium derived from quartz diorite.  Slopes are 2 to 35
percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 18 inches,
and the mean annual temperature is about 47 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Ultic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Shangland loam, rangeland.  (Colors are for
moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

A--0 to 8 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
loam, brown (10YR 4/3) dry; moderate fine and medium
subangular blocky structure parting to weak fine and medium
granular; slightly hard, friable, common fine, and few
coarse roots; many very fine and fine tubular and
interstitial pores; neutral (pH 6.8); gradual wavy boundary.
(7 to 10 inches thick)

Bw--8 to 16 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) sandy loam,
yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) dry; moderate fine and medium
subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine and medium
and few coarse roots; many fine tubular pores; neutral (pH
6.6); abrupt wavy boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

C--16 to 23 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) loamy
sand, brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) dry; massive; soft, very
friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine and medium
and few coarse roots; 5 percent gravel; slightly acid (pH
6.4); abrupt wavy boundary.  (6 to 20 inches thick)

Cr--23 inches; partially weathered granitic bedrock; can
be dug with a spade but with difficulty.

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; about 1/2 mile north
of Sparta, 200 feet west of road and 100 feet south of the
National Forest boundary, in the NW1/4NW1/4 sec. 15, T. 8
S., R. 44 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  These soils are usually moist but
are dry in all parts between 6 and 18 inches for 60 to 80
consecutive days during the summer.  The mean annual soil
temperature is 47 to 51 degrees.   Depth to bedrock ranges
from 20 to 40 inches.  The thickness of the solum and mollic
epipedon is 12 to 20 inches.  The soil reaction is slightly
acid or neutral in all horizons.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist and 4 or 5 dry.  It
has 0 to 15 percent gravel and 0 to 3 percent cobbles.

The Bw horizon has dry value of 4 or 5 and chroma of 3 or 4
dry.  The texture is sandy loam or loam, and has 0 to 15
percent gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobbles.

The C horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5
moist, 5 or 6 dry, and chroma of 4 through 8 moist and dry.
The texture is loamy sand or coarse sandy loam, and has 0 to
15 percent gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobbles.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Canderly, Catelli,
Conconully, Crouch, Donavan, Ginnis, Hellgate, Picard,
Rebecca, Spokane, Usk, and Wind River series.  The Canderly, Conconully, Crouch, Donavan, Hellgate, Picard, Rebecca, and
Wind River soils are more than 40 inches deep.  Catelli
soils have a mean annual soil temperature of 56 to 58
degrees F.  Ginnis soils have a mollic epipedon 8 to 14
inches thick, are dry for 90 to 145 consecutive days, have a
solum thickness of 20 to 60 inches and averages 10 to 35
percent rock fragments in the particle-size control section.
Spokane soils have a mollic epipedon 7 to 14 inches thick
and have 15 to 35 percent rock fragments in the
particle-size control section.  Usk soils have a mollic
epipedon that is 7 to 12 inches thick and have 15 to 35
percent rock fragments in the particle-size control section.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Shangland soils are on hills with
slopes of 2 to 35 percent.  They are on ridge tops and
convex south-facing side slopes.  Elevation ranges from
3,600 to 4,000 feet.  These soils formed in colluvium and
residuum derived from quartz diorite.  The mean annual
precipitation is 16 to 20 inches.  The mean annual
temperature is 45 to 49 degrees F.  The frost-free period is
110 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Brownlee,
Dogtown and Kilmerque series.  The Brownlee soils are deep
and are in complex with Shangland soils.  The Dogtown soils
are deep and are on forested north slopes.  The Kilmerque
soils are similar but have a frigid temperature regime and
are on forested south slopes.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow to medium
runoff; moderately rapid permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly for rangeland.  Some small
areas are used for nonirrigated small grain, hay and
pasture.  The native vegetation is mainly mountain big
sagebrush, Idaho fescue, bluebunch wheatgrass, needlegrass, buckwheat, antelope bitterbrush, and wild crab apple.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northeastern Oregon.  The soils
are of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon, 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in
this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 16 inches (A, Bw horizons).

Cambic horizon - the zone from approximately 8 inches to 16
inches (Bw horizon).

Ultic intergrade - Base saturation is less than 75 percent
above the paralithic contact.

Paralithic contact - partially weathered granitic bedrock at approximately 24 inches.

Xeric feature - a moisture control section that is usually
moist, but dry for 60 to 80 consecutive days during the
summer.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
