LOCATION STANFLOW               OR

Established Series
Rev. WEL/TDT
10/2002

STANFLOW SERIES

The Stanflow series consists of moderately deep to a weakly
cemented layer, moderately well drained soils on low
terraces.  They formed in mixed alluvium.  Slopes are 0 to 2
percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 10 inches,
and the mean annual temperature is about 48 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty, mixed, superactive, calcareous, mesic Typic Halaquepts

TYPICAL PEDON:  Stanflow silt loam, pasture.  (Colors are
for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

Akn1--0 to 2 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt
loam, light gray (10YR 7/2) dry; weak thin and medium platy structure; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic;
many fine and common medium roots; common very fine and fine
tubular interstitial pores; strongly effervescent; SAR of
420, EC of 16, calcium carbonate of 6 percent; very strongly
alkaline (pH 10.3); abrupt smooth boundary.  (1 to 3 inches
thick)

Akn2--2 to 8 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt
loam, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry; weak medium and
thick platy structure; slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine and medium roots; common very fine
and fine tubular pores; strongly effervescent; SAR of 45, EC
of 3, calcium carbonate of 5 percent; very strongly alkaline
(pH 9.7); abrupt smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

Bkn1--8 to 15 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) silt
loam, light gray (10YR 7/2) dry; massive; slightly hard,
friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common fine and medium
roots; common very fine and fine tubular pores; strongly effervescent; SAR of 38, EC of 2, calcium carbonate of 2
percent; very strongly alkaline (pH 9.3); gradual smooth
boundary.  (5 to 15 inches thick)

Bkn2--15 to 21 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
silt loam, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry; massive;
slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; common
fine roots; many fine tubular pores; strongly effervescent;
SAR of 42, EC of 2, calcium carbonate of 1 percent; very
strongly alkaline (pH 9.2); abrupt smooth boundary.  (5 to
14 inches thick)

2Bkqmn--21 to 28 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
silt loam, light gray (10YR 7/2) dry; massive; hard, firm
and brittle, nonsticky and nonplastic; weakly cemented; few
very fine roots; many very fine and few fine tubular pores;
violently effervescent; SAR of 13, EC of 1, calcium
carbonate of 15 percent; strongly alkaline (pH 8.7); gradual
smooth boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

2Bk1--28 to 39 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
silt loam, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry; massive;
slightly hard, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; very few
fine and very fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular
pores; strongly effervescent; SAR or 6, EC of 1, calcium
carbonate of 18 percent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.3);
abrupt smooth boundary.  (10 to 20 inches thick)

2Bk2--39 to 60 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) loam, pale brown
(10YR 6/3) dry; massive; slightly hard, friable, slightly
sticky and slightly plastic; slightly effervescent; SAR of
5, EC of 1, calcium carbonate of 2 percent; moderately
alkaline (pH 8.2).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; about 4 miles east of
Haines near the Baldock Slough, in the NE1/4NW1/4 sec. 6, T.
8 S., R. 40 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Depth to the weakly cemented
layer and associated calcic horizon is 20 to 40 inches.  The
mean annual soil temperature ranges from 47 to 52 degrees F.
The soil is saturated throughout for some time of the year
in most years.  The particle-size control section averages
10 to 18 percent clay and less than 15 percent material
coarser than very fine sand.

The Akn horizons have value of 3 or 4 moist, 5 to 7 dry and
chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  Chromas at 3 are only found
in the A horizon.  SAR values are 30 or more throughout all
horizons.  It is very strongly alkaline.  It has EC of 16 or
more and decreases to 4 or less with depth.  In some pedons
the lower part contains up to 10 percent durinodes.

The 2Bkqmn horizon has color similar to the above horizons.
SAR values range from 10 to 20.

The 2Bk horizon has value of 3 or 4 moist, 6 or 7 dry and
chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It is typically silt loam
but can be loam or gravelly loam at depths of 30 inches or
more.  It is moderately or strongly alkaline.  SAR values
range from 2 to 10.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Janise, Sinloc and Umapine
series.  These soils lack the weakly cemented layer.  In
addition, Janise soils have a thin E and Bt horizon; Sinloc
soils have stratified silt loam, very fine sandy loam and
fine sandy loam in the lower part of the particle-size
control section; Umapine soils are somewhat poorly drained.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Stanflow soils are on low terraces.
They formed in mixed alluvium and have a strong influence of
volcanic ash in the upper horizons.  Slopes are 0 to 2
percent.  The elevation ranges from 2,000 to 3,500 feet.
The mean annual precipitation is 9 to 12 inches.  The mean
annual temperature is 45 to 50 degrees F.  The frost-free
period is 110 to 140 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Burkemont,
Haines, and Umapine soils.  The Burkemont soils are poorly
drained, have a fine textured subsoil, and occur on adjacent
lower surfaces.  The Haines soils are poorly drained and
occur on adjacent lower surfaces.  The Umapine soils lack
the weakly cemented layer.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained.  Depth
to a seasonal fluctuating water table ranges from 24 to 48
inches during the spring and late winter months; slow
runoff; permeability is moderate through the upper horizons
and slow through the weakly cemented layer.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of this soil are used for
pasture.  Some reclaimed areas are used for hay production.
The native vegetation is mainly salt grass, basin wildrye,
and greasewood.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Oregon.  The series is of
small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in
this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - dry value of 6 or 7 throughout the
profile.

Aquept - aquic soil moisture regime.

Halaquept - SAR of over 13 from the surface to a depth of 28
inches.

Calcic horizon - calcium carbonate percent of over 15 from
21 to 39 inches.

Weakly cemented layer at 21 to 28 inches.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Lab data from type location, sample
numbers 87P 603-609.

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
