LOCATION STOVEPIPE              OR

Established Series
Rev. MHF/TDT
10/2002

STOVEPIPE SERIES

The Stovepipe series consists of deep, poorly drained soils
on flood plains.  They formed in mixed alluvium with an
influence of loess and volcanic ash in the surface.  Slopes
are 0 to 3 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about
20 inches, and the mean annual temperature is about 43
degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-silty over sandy or sandy-skeletal, mixed, superactive Typic Cryaquolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Stovepipe silt loam - on a 2 percent slope,
native meadow.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
noted.)

A1--0 to 6 inches; black (10YR 2/1) silt loam, grayish
brown (10YR 5/2) dry; many medium distinct yellowish brown
(10YR 5/6) mottles; moderate very fine and fine subangular
blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic; many very fine and fine and few medium
roots; many very fine tubular pores; 10 percent gravel;
neutral (pH 6.8); clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 7 inches
thick)

A2--6 to 13 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) silt loam,
grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; many medium distinct gray
(10YR 5/1) mottles; moderate fine and medium subangular
blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic; many very fine and fine and few medium
roots; many very fine tubular pores; 10 percent gravel;
neutral (pH 6.8); clear smooth boundary.  (6 to 13 inches
thick)

Bg--13 to 24 inches; gray (2.5Y 5/0) silt loam, light
gray (2.5Y 7/2) dry; many coarse distinct gray (10YR 5/1)
and few medium distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) mottles;
moderate fine and medium subangular blocky structure;
slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly
plastic; many very fine and fine and few medium roots; many
very fine tubular pores; 10 percent (2-4 mm) concretions;
neutral (pH 7.0); abrupt smooth boundary.  (10 to 20 inches
thick)

2Cg1--24 to 33 inches; dark gray (5Y 4/1) extremely
gravelly loamy sand, light gray (5Y 7/1) dry; many coarse
distinct yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) mottles; single grained;
loose, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine and medium roots;
many very fine and fine irregular pores; 50 percent gravel
and 15 percent cobbles; mildly alkaline (pH 7.6); gradual
smooth boundary.  (20 to 30 inches thick)

2Cg2--33 to 60 inches; multicolored extremely gravelly
sand; single grained; loose, nonsticky and nonplastic.

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; NE1/4NE1/4NE1/4SE1/4
sec. 18, T. 10 S., R. 38 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
ranges from 42 to 47 degrees F, and the mean summer
temperature is less than 55 degrees F.  The mollic epipedon
is 10 to 20 inches thick.  Depth to the contrasting-textured
material is 20 to 40 inches.  The upper part of the
particle-size control section averages 5 to 15 percent clay
and has less than 15 percent particles coarser than fine
sand; the lower part has 0 to 10 percent clay 80 to 95
percent sand and 50 to 80 percent coarse fragments.  Some
pedons may have up to 15 percent (2 to 4 mm) concretions.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 4 or 5 dry and
chroma of 1 or 2 moist and dry.  It has 0 to 10 percent
gravel.  It has common to many distinct or prominent
mottles.

The Bg horizon has hue of 2.5Y or 5Y, value of 4 or 5 moist,
6 or 7 dry and chroma of 0 to 2 moist and dry.  It is silt
loam, averaging 10 to 18 percent clay.  It has 0 to 15
percent gravel.  It has many distinct or prominent mottles.
It is neutral or mildly alkaline.

The 2Cg horizon has hue of 5Y or 2.5Y.  It has value of 4 or
5 moist, 6 or 7 dry and chroma of 0 to 2 moist and dry.  It
is very gravelly loamy sand, extremely gravelly loamy sand
or extremely gravelly sand with 40 to 60 percent gravel and
10 to 20 percent cobbles.  It has many distinct or prominent
mottles.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no competing series.  The Dilman, Foxcreek, and Walden series are similar.  These soils are fine-silty over sandy or sandy-skeletal.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Stovepipe soils occur on flood plains.
Slopes are 0 to 3 percent.  Elevations range from 3,800 to
4,200 feet.  The soils formed in mixed alluvium with an
influence of loess and volcanic ash in the surface.  The
mean annual precipitation is 16 to 24 inches.  The mean
annual temperature is 40 to 45 degrees F.  The frost-free
period is 50 to 90 days.  This soil is on the Ingram
geomorphic surface.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the McEwen,
Sumpley and Webfoot soils.  McEwen soils are on adjacent
higher terraces, are well drained, have an argillic horizon
and are fine-loamy.  Sumpley soils are somewhat poorly
drained and are fine-loamy over sandy or sandy-skeletal.
Webfoot soils are on adjacent low terraces, are
loamy-skeletal and have a mollic epipedon over 20 inches
thick.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained.  Runoff is slow
to ponded.  Permeability is moderate in the surface and
rapid in the substratum.  A water table fluctuates between 6
and 18 inches from March through June and is occasionally
flooded for brief duration during the same months.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas of Stovepipe soils are used
for native meadow pasture.  The native vegetation is mainly
tufted hairgrass, redtop, sedges and rushes.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Higher elevation valleys and
basins of eastern Oregon.  The series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon, 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 13 inches (A1, A2 horizons).

Cambic horizon - 13 to 24 inches with chroma of 2 or less.

Aquolls - mottles with chroma of 2 or less throughout the
profile.

Cryic - mean annual soil temperature ranges from 42 to 47
degrees F, and mean summer soil temperature is less than 55
degrees F.

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
