LOCATION BALDRIDGE              OR

Established Series
Rev. AEK/TDT
10/2002

BALDRIDGE SERIES

The Baldridge series consists of deep, well drained soils
formed in colluvium derived from rhyolite and andesite.
Baldridge soils are on mountain slopes of 12 to 70 percent.
The mean annual precipitation is 18 inches, and the mean
annual temperature is 42 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, frigid Pachic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Baldridge very gravelly loam, on a 65
percent convex south slope; rangeland.  (Colors are for
moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

A1--0 to 7 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) very
gravelly loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; weak fine subangular blocky structure parting to weak fine granular;
slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and slightly plastic;
many very fine and fine roots; many very fine and fine
irregular pores; 50 percent gravel; neutral (pH 7.0); clear
wavy boundary.  (3 to 9 inches thick)

A2--7 to 14 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) very
gravelly loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak fine and
medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very
friable, nonsticky, and slightly plastic; many very fine and
fine roots; many very fine and fine and few medium and
coarse tubular pores; 40 percent gravel; neutral (pH 7.2);
clear wavy boundary.  (4 to 13 inches thick)

Bw1--14 to 23 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
very gravelly loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak fine
and medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very
friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common very
fine and fine and few medium and coarse roots; many very
fine and fine and few medium and coarse tubular pores; 40
percent gravel and 5 percent cobbles; neutral (pH 7.2);
gradual wavy boundary.  (7 to 15 inches thick)

Bw2--23 to 30 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
very gravelly loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak
medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very
friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine
and few medium and coarse roots; common very fine and fine
tubular pores; 45 percent gravel and 15 percent cobbles;
neutral (pH 7.2); gradual wavy boundary.  (6 to 14 inches
thick)

Bw3--30 to 47 inches; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
extremely cobbly loam, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) dry; weak
medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, very
friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic; common very fine
and fine and few coarse and very coarse roots; common fine
and medium tubular pores; 45 percent gravel and 35 percent
cobbles; neutral (pH 6.8); clear wavy boundary.  (0 to 17
inches thick)

C--47 to 60 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2)
extremely cobbly sandy loam, light gray (10YR 7/2) dry;
massive; slightly hard, very friable, nonsticky and
nonplastic; few fine and medium roots; common fine tubular
pores; 25 percent gravel and 45 percent cobbles; neutral (pH
6.8).  (10 to 20 inches thick)

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; located about 1/4 mile
east of the Dooley Mt. highway at the NW corner of the SW1/4SE1/4NE1/4 sec. 17, T. 12 S., R. 40 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  These soils are usually moist,
but are dry in the moisture control section for 45 to 60
consecutive days following the summer solstice.  The mean
annual soil temperature is 43 to 47 degrees F.  Depth to
bedrock is typically over 60 inches, but bedrock is 40 to 60
inches in some pedons.  The soils developed in colluvium
from rhyolite and andesite, and commonly have rock fragments throughout the profile.  The surface has 0 to 15 percent
stones.  The thickness of the mollic epipedon is 20 to 35
inches.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 3 to 5 dry and
chroma of 1 or 2 moist, 2 or 3 dry.  It has 20 to 60 percent
gravel, 0 to 10 percent cobbles and 0 to 15 stones.

The Bw horizon has value of 3 or 4 moist, 5 or 6 dry, chroma
of 2 or 3 moist and 2 to 4 dry.  It has 25 to 60 percent
gravel, 0 to 45 percent cobbles, and 0 to 20 percent stones.
It is loam, sandy loam, or sandy clay loam.

The C horizon has value of 4 to 6 moist, 6 or 7 dry, and
chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It has 20 to 60 percent
gravel, 10 to 45 percent cobbles and 0 to 55 percent stones.
It is loam, sandy loam, and sandy clay loam.

COMPETING SERIES:  The Burgi, Chambeam, Ginser, Glean,
Lambring(T), Rondowa(T), Sinker, Webfoot, and Westbutte(T) series.  Sinker and Westbutte soils have a lithic contact at depths
of 20 to 40 inches.  Ginser soils have a paralithic contact
at depths of 20 to 40 inches.  Burgi soils have less than 50
percent coarse fragments throughout.  Chambeam soils lack
basalt and/or andesite gravel and cobble size fragments and
are 40 to 60 inches deep.  Glean and Lambring soils are dry
more than half the time when the temperature is greater than
41 degrees F and are 40 to 60 inches deep to a lithic contact.  Rondowa soils have a strong influence from volcanic ash in the
upper part and lack B horizons.  Webfoot soils are somewhat
poorly drained with gleyed conditions at 25 to 35 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Baldridge soils are on south and
west-facing aspects and ridge tops of mountain slopes at
elevation of 4,000 to 6,000 feet.  Slopes are 12 to 70

percent.  The soil is formed in colluvium derived dominantly
from rhyolite and andesite.  The mean annual precipitation
is 16 to 20 inches.  The mean annual temperature is 40 to 45
degrees F.  The frost-free period is 50 to 90 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are Anatone,
Huntrock, Inkler, Segundo and Stavely soils.  Anatone soils
are less than 20 inches to a lithic contact.  Huntrock and
Inkler soils have ash or ash influence in the surface
layers.  Segundo soils lack a mollic epipedon.  Stavely
soils are nonskeletal.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; runoff is slow to
rapid.  Permeability is moderate.

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are used for rangeland,
wildlife and watershed.  The native vegetation is mountain
big sagebrush, bluebunch wheatgrass, Idaho fescue and
Sandberg bluegrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northeast Oregon.  The soils are inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth at 30 inches.

Cambic horizon - the zone from 14 to 47 inches (Bw1, Bw2 and
Bw3 horizons).

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
