LOCATION BENDERLY               OR

Established Series
Rev. WEL/TDT
8/88

BENDERLY SERIES

The Benderly series consists of deep, somewhat excessively
drained soils on alluvial fans.  They formed in mixed
alluvium.  Slope is 0 to 7 percent.  The mean annual
precipitation is about 14 inches, and the mean annual
temperature is about 47 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Sandy-skeletal, mixed, mesic Entic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Benderly gravelly fine sandy loam,
rangeland.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
noted.)

A1--0 to 6 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
gravelly fine sandy loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry;
weak fine and medium granular structure; soft, friable,
nonsticky and nonplastic; many fine roots; many fine
interstitial pores; 20 percent gravel, and 2 percent
cobbles; neutral (pH 7.0); gradual wavy boundary.  (4 to 8
inches thick)

A2--6 to 16 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) gravelly fine
sandy loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; weak fine and medium
subangular blocky structure; soft, friable, nonsticky, and nonplastic; common fine and few medium roots; common fine
tubular pores; 25 percent gravel; neutral (pH 7.2); abrupt
wavy boundary.  (6 to 12 inches thick)

2C1--16 to 21 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) extremely
gravelly sand, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; single grain; loose,
friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; few fine and medium
roots; common fine tubular pores; 55 percent gravel and 10
percent cobbles; mildly alkaline (pH 7.4); abrupt wavy
boundary.  (4 to 10 inches thick)

2C2--21 to 60 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) extremely
gravelly sand, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; single grain;
loose, friable, nonsticky and nonplastic; very few fine
roots; common fine tubular pores; 50 percent gravel and 20
percent cobbles; mildly alkaline (pH 7.6).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; 1/2 mile mile west of Pocahontas road and 20 feet north of Bendier road at the SE
corner of the SE1/4SW1/4 sec. 19, T. 8 S., R. 39 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
is 47 to 52 degrees F.  These soils are usually moist but
are dry in all parts of the moisture control section for 60
to 80 consecutive days during the summer.  The particle-size
control section averages 60 to 80 percent rock fragments
primarily gravel size.  The thickness of the A horizon is 10
to 20 inches.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 4 or 5 dry, and
chroma of 1 or 2 moist and dry.  It has 15 to 30 percent
gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobbles.  It has 1 to 2 percent
organic matter.

The 2C horizon has value of 3 or 4 moist, 5 or 6 dry, and
chroma of 2 to 4 moist and dry.  It is extremely gravelly
loamy sand or extremely gravelly sand and has 40 to 60
percent gravel and 5 to 25 percent cobbles.  It is mildly
alkaline to moderately alkaline.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Neptune and Sequim series.
Neptune soils have 5 to 25 percent marine shells in the
control section and are strongly or violently effervescent.
The Sequim soils are slightly acid to neutral throughout.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Benderly soils are on alluvial fans.
They formed in mixed alluvium.  Elevation is 3,400 to 3,800
feet.  Slopes are 0 to 7 percent.  The mean annual
precipitation is 12 to 16 inches.  The mean annual
temperature is 45 to 50 degrees F.  The frost-free period is
100 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Goodrich,
Ladd, and Wingville soils.  The Goodrich soils are in a
coarse-loamy family.  The Ladd soils are on adjacent
hillslopes and are in a fine-loamy family.  Wingville soils
are somewhat poorly drained and are on adjacent flood
plains.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat excessively drained;
moderately rapid permeability; slow runoff.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used mainly as rangeland.  Also used
for irrigated hay and pasture and homesite development.  The
native vegetation is mountain big sagebrush, Sandberg
bluegrass, needleandthread, Thurber needlegrass, bluebunch wheatgrass, Idaho fescue, and a few scattered ponderosa
pine.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Oregon.  The series is
inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of 16 inches.

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
