LOCATION GOODRICH               OR

Established Series
Rev. AON/TDT
10/2002

GOODRICH SERIES

The Goodrich series consists of deep, well drained soils on
stream terraces and alluvial fans.  They formed in mixed
alluvium.  Slopes are 0 to 12 percent.  The mean annual
precipitation is about 11 inches, and the mean annual
temperature is about 49 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Coarse-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Entic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Goodrich gravelly loam, cultivated.  (Colors
are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

Ap--0 to 6 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
gravelly loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak fine
granular structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic; many very fine roots; many very fine
irregular pores; 15 percent gravel; neutral (pH 7.3); abrupt
smooth boundary.  (5 to 8 inches thick)

A--6 to 12 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
gravelly loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak medium and
coarse subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common very fine
roots; common very fine tubular pores; 20 percent gravel;
mildly alkaline (pH 7.6); clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 12
inches thick)

C1--12 to 25 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly
loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; massive; slightly hard,
friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine
roots; common very fine tubular pores; 25 percent gravel;
mildly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt smooth boundary.  (10 to 20
inches thick)

C2--25 to 40 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly
loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; massive; slightly hard,
friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few fine
roots; common fine tubular pores; 30 percent gravel; mildly
alkaline (pH 7.5); gradual wavy boundary.  (10 to 20 inches
thick)

2C3--40 to 60 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) and dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/2) very gravelly loam and very
gravelly sandy loam, light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) dry;
massive; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and
slightly plastic; 45 percent gravel; mildly alkaline (pH
7.5).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; 1,400 feet north 360
feet east of the southwest corner, sec. 28, T. 8 S., R. 39
E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
is about 48 to 52 degrees F.  The mean summer soil
temperature is about 63 to 67 degrees F.  These soils are
dry in all parts for more than 60 consecutive days after the
summer solstice.  Depth to the 2C horizon is 40 to 60
inches.  The particle-size control section has 8 to 18
percent clay and more than 15 percent fine sand and coarser.

The A horizon has value of 4 or 5 dry, 2 or 3 moist with
chroma of 1 or 2 moist and dry.

The C1 and C2 horizons have value of 4 or 5 dry and chroma
of 2 and 3 moist and dry.  It is silt loam and loam with 15
to 35 percent gravel.

The 2C horizon is very gravelly loam and very gravelly sandy
loam.  It has 35 to 50 percent gravel.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Crafton, Pleasant Vale and
Rainey series.  Crafton and Rainey soils are moderately deep
to a paralithic contact.  Pleasant Vale soils have 15 to 40
percent calcium carbonate throughout and are typically
gravel free throughout.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Goodrich soils are on alluvial fans
and stream terraces at elevations of 2,300 to 3,800 feet.
Slopes are 0 to 12 percent.  The soils formed in alluvium
weathered from mixed igneous and metamorphic rock mixed with
volcanic ash and loess.  The climate is semiarid with hot
dry summers and cold moist winter.  The annual precipitation
is 12 to 16 inches.  The mean annual temperature is about 45
to 51 degrees F.  The frost-free period is 100 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Baldock,
Jett, and Wingville soils.  Baldock soils are poorly drained
and lack rock fragments.  Wingville soils are somewhat
poorly drained and lack rock fragments.  The Jett soils are fine-silty.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow to medium
runoff; moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Principal use is for irrigated small
grain crops, alfalfa and pasture.  Native vegetation is
mainly bluebunch wheatgrass, giant wildrye and big sage.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Oregon.  The series is
inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 12 inches (Ap, A horizons).

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
