LOCATION DAMORE                 OR

Established Series
Rev. MHF/TDT
02/97

DAMORE SERIES

The Damore series consists of deep, somewhat poorly drained
soils on flood plains.  They formed in mixed alluvium with
an influence of loess and volcanic ash in the surface
horizons.  Slopes are 0 to 3 percent.  The mean annual
precipitation is about 18 inches, and the mean annual
temperature is about 43 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, frigid Fluvaquentic Haploxerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Damore silt loam - in an area of
Damore-Silvies silt loams, 0 to 3 percent slopes, improved
meadow.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

A1--0 to 12 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) silt
loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; moderate fine and
medium subangular blocky structure parting to moderate fine
and medium granular; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic; many very fine and fine and few medium
roots; many very fine tubular pores; neutral (pH 7.2); clear
smooth boundary.  (8 to 12 inches thick)

A2--12 to 22 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
silty clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; moderate fine
and medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard,
friable, sticky and slightly plastic; common fine and few
medium roots; many very fine tubular pores; neutral (pH
7.0); abrupt smooth boundary.  (6 to 14 inches thick)

Bw--22 to 34 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 3/4)
silty clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; common fine faint
dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2) mottles; moderate medium and
coarse subangular blocky structure; hard, firm, sticky and
plastic; few fine and medium roots; many very fine tubular
pores; neutral (pH 7.2); gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 14
inches thick)

2Bk1--34 to 40 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) silty clay, pale
brown (10YR 6/3) dry; many medium prominent dark grayish
brown (2.5Y 4/2) mottles; massive; hard, firm, sticky and
plastic; common very fine tubular pores; violently
effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.2); clear smooth
boundary.  (4 to 7 inches thick)

2Bk2--40 to 52 inches; olive brown (2.5Y 4/4) silty
clay, light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/4) dry; massive; hard,
firm, sticky and plastic; common very fine tubular pores;
strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); gradual
smooth boundary.  (10 to 13 inches thick)

2C--52 to 60 inches; olive brown (2.5Y 4/4) gravelly
clay, light yellowish brown (2.5Y 6/4) dry; massive; hard,
firm, sticky and plastic; common very fine tubular pores; 20
percent gravel and 5 percent cobbles; mildly alkaline (pH
7.8).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; SW1/4NW1/4SE1/4 sec.
23, T. 13 S., R. 36 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
is 42 to 47 degrees F, and the mean summer temperature is
greater than 55 degrees F.  Depth to the 2Bk horizon and
secondary carbonates is 20 to 40 inches.  The soil is dry
for 60 to 90 consecutive days in the four months following
the summer solstice.  The lower part of the subsoil is
slightly to violently effervescent.  The particle-size
control section is silty clay loam, silty clay, or clay and
averages 35 to 60 percent clay.

The A1 horizon is high in organic matter and has a moist
bulk density of 1.00 to 1.30 in the surface horizon.  It has
value of 2 moist, 3 or 4 dry and chroma of 1 or 2.
Structure is moderate granular or subangular blocky.

The A2 horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 4 or 5 dry and
chroma of 2 moist and dry.  It is silty clay loam, averaging
30 to 35 percent clay.

The Bw horizon has value of 3 or 4 moist, 4 or 5 dry and
chroma of 3 or 4 moist and dry.  It is silty clay loam or
silty clay, with 35 to 45 percent clay.  It has few to
common faint or distinct mottles.

The 2Bk horizon has value of 4 or 5 moist, 5 or 6 dry and
chroma of 3 or 4 moist and dry.  It is silty clay or clay,
with 40 to 50 percent clay.  It has common to many distinct
or prominent mottles and may be gleyed.  Soil reaction
ranges from mildly to moderately alkaline.

The 2C horizon has hue of 2.5Y or 10YR.  It has value of 4
or 5 moist, 5 or 6 dry and chroma of 3 or 4 moist and dry.
It is silty clay, clay or gravelly clay, with 40 to 60
percent clay.  Coarse fragments range from 10 to 20 percent
gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobbles.  The upper part of this
horizon may be strongly to violently effervescent, with the
lime disseminated throughout.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are no competing series.  The Hussman
series is similar.  Hussman soils have a mesic soil temperature regime.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Damore soils occur on flood plains.
Slopes are 0 to 3 percent.  Elevations range from 3,700 to
5,000 feet.  The soils formed in mixed alluvium with an
influence of loess and volcanic ash in the surface horizons.
The mean annual precipitation is 12 to 25 inches.  The mean
annual temperature is 40 to 45 degrees F.  The frost-free
period is 50 to 90 days.  This soil occurs on the Winkle
geomorphic surface.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Burntriver,
Marack, and Silvies soils.  Burntriver soils are on adjacent
terraces and fans and are well drained.  Marack soils are on
adjacent higher terraces, are well drained, and have a
calcic horizon.  Silvies soils are on bottom lands in
depressional areas, are poorly drained, and have a cryic
soil temperature regime.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat poorly drained.  Runoff
is slow.  Permeability is moderately slow in the subsoil and
slow in the substratum.  A high water table is present at 12
to 24 inches from March through June and is occasionally
flooded during this same period.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Most areas are used for meadow hay
production and pasture.  The native vegetation is mainly
tufted hairgrass, sedge, and Baltic rush.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Higher elevation valleys and
basins of central and eastern Oregon.  The series is of
small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 22 inches (A1, A2 horizons).

Cambic horizon - the zone from approximately 22 to 34 inches
(Bw horizon).

Fluvaquentic - profile has low chroma mottles at 22 inches,
a water table above 40 inches from March through June, and
the organic-carbon content decreases irregularly with depth.  Secondary carbonates are present within a depth of 1.5
meters.

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
