LOCATION DEPCOR                 TX

Established Series
Rev. WRM:LCB
03/2003

DEPCOR SERIES

The Depcor series consists of deep, moderately well drained,
slowly permeable soils that formed in unconsolidated loamy
sediments.  These gently sloping to strongly sloping soils
are on uplands.  Slopes range from 1 to 12 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy, siliceous, semiactive, thermic Arenic Plinthic Paleudalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Depcor loamy fine sand--forested. (Colors
are for moist soil unless otherwise stated.)

A--0 to 5 inches; brown (10YR 5/3) loamy fine sand;
weak fine granular structure; loose, very friable; many
fine, medium, and coarse roots; very strongly acid; clear
smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

E--5 to 26 inches; light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4)
loamy fine sand; single grained; loose, very friable; many
fine, medium, and coarse roots; few nodules of ironstone 5
to 15 mm in diameter; very strongly acid; clear smooth
boundary.  (15 to 33 inches thick)

Bt--26 to 32 inches; yellowish brown (10YR 5/6) sandy
clay loam with common medium prominent red (10R 4/6)
mottles; moderate medium subangular blocky structure; hard,
firm; many fine, medium, and coarse roots; common fine
pores; very strongly acid; clear smooth boundary.  (5 to 10
inches thick)

Btv1--32 to 44 inches; mottled yellowish brown (10YR
5/6), dark red (10R 3/6), and light brownish gray (10YR 6/2)
sandy clay loam; moderate medium subangular blocky
structure; hard, firm; many medium and coarse roots; few
fine pores; thick continuous clay films on faces of peds; 20
percent by volume of plinthite; very strongly acid; clear
smooth boundary.  (8 to 15 inches thick)

Btv2--44 to 65 inches; mottled red (10R 4/8), strong
brown (7.5YR 5/8), and light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) sandy
clay loam; moderate coarse blocky structure; hard, firm; few
medium and coarse roots; few fine pores; thick continuous
clay films and clay flows along the faces of peds; 15
percent by volume of plinthite; very strongly acid; gradual
smooth boundary.  (10 to 25 inches thick)

C--65 to 80 inches; red (10R 4/8) sandy clay loam with
few medium prominent yellowish brown (10YR 5/8) mottles;
massive; hard, firm; few gray clay coats and flows along
fracture planes; few strata of yellowish brown sand; very
strongly acid.

TYPE LOCATION:  Walker County, Texas; from the intersection
of Interstate Highway 45 and Farm Road 1374 at Huntsville,
Texas, 0.5 mile south on Farm Road 1374 and 200 feet west of
road in woods.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Solum thickness ranges from 60 to
80 inches.  Depth to a horizon containing 5 to 25 percent
plinthite ranges from 25 to 40 inches.  Base saturation at
72 inches depth ranges from 35 to 60 percent.  Nodules of
ironstone range from none to few.

The A horizon is dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2), grayish
brown (10YR 5/2), brown (10YR 5/3; 7.5YR 5/2), pinkish gray
(7.5YR 6/2), or pale brown (10YR 6/3).

The E horizon is light yellowish brown (10YR 6/4), pale
brown (10YR 6/3), or very pale brown (10YR 7/4).  The lower
part of this horizon has none to few dark brown mottles.
The A and E horizons are loamy fine sand or loamy sand and
range from slightly acid to very strongly acid.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 to 6,
and chroma of 4 to 8.  Mottles are few to common in shades
of red and brown.  It is sandy clay loam or clay loam and
ranges from medium acid to very strongly acid.  The Btv
horizons are mottled in shades of red (10R 4/8), light red
(2.5YR 6/8), dark red (10R 3/6; 2.5YR 3/6), yellowish red
(5YR 5/6, 5/8), reddish yellow (5YR 6/6, 6/8), yellowish
brown (10YR 5/6, 5/8), reddish brown (5YR 5/3, 5/4), strong
brown (7.5YR 5/8), light brownish gray (10YR 6/2), light
gray (10YR 7/1), and gray (10YR 5/1, 6/1).  They range from
sandy clay loam to clay loam with clay content ranging from
22 to 35 percent.  Reaction ranges from slightly acid to
very strongly acid.

The C horizon ranges in base color from red, yellowish red,
strong brown, to brown and in many pedons is mottled in
shades of red, yellow, gray, and brown.  It is fine sandy
loam, sandy clay loam, or sandy clay, and is stratified in
many pedons.  Reaction ranges from medium acid to very
strongly acid.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Monaville series in the
same family and the similar Boy, Briley, Conroe, Fetzer,
Larue, Lilbert, Tripp, Wicksburg, and Wolfpen series.
Monaville soils have moderately slow permeability, have a
perched water table at greater depths, contain more silt in
the control section, and are typically on coast prairie
landscapes.  Boy soils have sandy A horizons more than 40
inches thick.  Briley, Lilbert and Tripp soils have base
saturation less than 35 percent.  Conroe and Wicksburg soils
have clayey Bt horizons and less than 35 percent base
saturation. Fetzer, Larue and Wolfpen soils have less than 5
percent plinthite in the Bt horizon.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Depcor soils are on gently sloping to
strongly sloping uplands.  Slope gradients are mainly 1 to 8
percent, but range to 12 percent.  The climate is subhumid.
The mean annual precipitation ranges from 40 to 50 inches;
mean annual temperature ranges from 66 to 70 degrees F., and Thornthwaite annual P-E index ranges from 64 to 80.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the competing
Boy and Conroe series and the Annona, Boy, Fetzer, Gunter
and Landman series. Annona soils have fine sandy loam A
horizon less than 10 inches thick, and are on nearly gentle
slopes.  Fetzer soils are on slightly lower gentler slopes.
Gunter soils are on nearby areas, have sandy A horizon more
than 40 inches thick, and have less than 35 percent base
saturation.  Landman soils are on slightly higher areas and
have sandy surface layers more than 40 inches thick.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Moderately well drained; slow
runoff; slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly in forest, but small acreages
are used for pasture or cultivated crops.  Native vegetation
consists of loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, red oak, and
other hardwoods. Understory vegetation consists of eastern
little bluestem, indiangrass, longleaf uniola, purpletop,
and low panicums.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Western Coastal Plain of Texas.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas
Series is extensive. SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Walker County,
Texas; 1975.

REMARKS:  Depcor series was formerly included in the
Wicksburg series.  Diagnostic horizons and features
recognized in this pedon are:

Ochric epipedon - 0 to 5 inches

Arenic feature  - 0 to 26 inches, loamy fine sand or coarser
texture

Argillic horizon - 26 to 65 inches

Plinthic feature - 32 to 65 inches

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
