LOCATION DERRINGER              OR

Established Series
Rev. MHF/TDT
01/2023

DERRINGER SERIES

The Derringer series consists of moderately deep, well
drained soils on side slopes of mountainous areas.  They
formed in colluvium from argillite and rhyolitic tuffs and
breccias.  Slopes are 12 to 60 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about 18 inches, and the mean annual
temperature is about 43 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Clayey-skeletal, smectitic, frigid Typic Argixerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Derringer very gravelly loam - rangeland.
(Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

A1--0 to 6 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
very gravelly loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; weak
very fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard,
friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many very
fine and fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular pores;
50 percent gravel and 5 percent cobbles; neutral (pH 6.8);
clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

A2--6 to 17 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) very gravelly
clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; moderate fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many very fine and
fine roots; many very fine and fine tubular pores; 55
percent gravel; neutral (pH 6.8); gradual smooth boundary.
(6 to 12 inches thick)

Bt1--17 to 26 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) extremely
gravelly clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; moderate fine
subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine roots;
many fine tubular pores; few thin dark yellowish brown (10YR
4/4) clay films on faces of peds; 60 percent gravel; neutral
(pH 6.6); gradual smooth boundary.  (4 to 9 inches thick)

Bt2--26 to 36 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) extremely
gravelly silty clay, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; strong fine and
medium subangular blocky structure; hard, firm, sticky and
plastic; common fine roots; few fine tubular pores; common
moderately thick dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4) clay films
on faces of peds and in pores; 65 percent gravel; slightly
acid (pH 6.4); abrupt wavy boundary.  (6 to 11 inches thick)

2Cr--36 inches; highly weathered tuffaceous bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; SE1/4NW1/4NW1/4NW1/4
of sec. 20, T. 11 S., R. 37 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  These soils are usually moist but
are dry in all parts between 4 and 12 inches for 60 to 80
consecutive days during the summer.  Mean annual soil
temperature is about 42 to 47 degrees F.  Depth to a
paralithic contact is 20 to 40 inches.  Depth to the Bt
horizon is 10 to 20 inches.  Coarse fragments range from 35
to 80 percent in the textural control section.  The mollic
epipedon is 10 to 20 inches thick.  The solum ranges from
neutral to slightly acid.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 3 or 4 dry and
chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It has 30 to 50 percent
gravel and 5 to 10 percent cobbles.

The Bt horizon has value of 4 moist, 4 or 5 dry and chroma
of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It is silty clay, clay or heavy
clay loam, averaging 35 to 50 percent clay.  It has 40 to 65
percent gravel and 0 to 20 percent cobbles.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Birchcreek, Erakatak,
Leevan, Mcivey, Ravenswood, Roostercomb, Yago, and Yeates
Hollow series.  The Mcivey and Yeates Hollow soils are more
than 40 inches deep to bedrock.  Erakatak, Leevan, and
Ravenswood soils are 20 to 40 inches deep to a lithic
contact.  Birchcreek and Roostercomb soils are 20 to 40
inches deep to a lithic contact.  Yago soils have secondary
lime within 40 inches.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Derringer soils are on side slopes of mountainous areas.  Slopes are 12 to 60 percent.  Elevations
range from 4,000 to 5,700 feet.  The soils formed in
colluvium weathered mainly from argillite and rhyolitic
tuffs and breccias.  The mean annual precipitation is 16 to
20 inches.  The mean annual temperature is 40 to 45 degrees
F.  The frost-free period is 50 to 90 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Boiler,
Hankins, Harlow, Hudspeth and Morningstar soils.  Boiler and
Hankins soils are greater than 40 inches deep to bedrock and
have argillic horizons with clayey particle-size class and
abrupt upper boundaries.  They are mapped on adjacent north
slopes.  Boiler soils are clayey-skeletal and Hankins soils
are nonskeletal.  Harlow soils have a lithic contact at
depths between 10 and 20 inches.  Hudspeth and Morningstar
soils are skeletal and mapped on adjacent south slopes.
Hudspeth soils are 20 to 40 inches deep to bedrock and have
an argillic horizon with a clayey particle-size class and
abrupt upper boundary.  Morningstar soils are greater than
40 inches deep to bedrock and are loamy-skeletal.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is medium
to rapid.  Permeability is slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are used mainly for
rangeland and wildlife habitat.  The vegetation is mainly
mountain big sagebrush, wild crab apple, bitter cherry,
bitterbrush, buckwheat, gray rabbitbrush, widely scattered
ponderosa pine and western juniper, bluebunch wheatgrass,
Idaho fescue and some Sandberg bluegrass.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mountainous areas of eastern
Oregon.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  The diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 17 inches (A horizon).

Argillic horizon - the zone from approximately 17 to 36
inches (Bt1, Bt2 horizons).

Typic feature - profile has a mollic epipedon less than 20
inches thick.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
