LOCATION APPLEGATE              OR+ID

Established Series
Rev. WEL/TDT
02/97

APPLEGATE SERIES

The Applegate series consists of deep, well drained soils on terraces.  They formed in colluvium and alluvium.  Slopes
are 2 to 15 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is about
20 inches, and the mean annual temperature is 47 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic, mesic Ultic Argixerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Applegate silt loam, pasture.  (Colors are
for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

A1--0 to 6 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) silt loam,
brown (7.5YR 4/2) dry; moderate fine granular structure;
slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly
plastic; many very fine and fine roots; common very fine and
fine tubular and interstitial pores; neutral (pH 6.8); clear
smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

A2--6 to 11 inches; dark brown (7.5YR 3/2) silt loam,
brown (7.5YR 4/4) dry; moderate fine and medium subangular
blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic; common very fine and fine roots;
common very fine, fine, and medium tubular pores; neutral
(pH 6.6); gradual smooth boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

BA--11 to 28 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) silty
clay loam, brown (7.5YR 4/4) dry; moderate medium subangular
blocky structure, hard, friable, sticky and plastic; few
very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine and few
medium tubular pores; slightly acid (pH 6.4); gradual smooth boundary.  (5 to 20 inches thick)

Bt1--28 to 45 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) clay,
brown (7.5YR 5/4) dry; moderate medium and coarse subangular
blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky and plastic; few
very fine roots; many fine tubular pores; common thin clay
films on peds; slightly acid (pH 6.2); gradual smooth
boundary.  (10 to 20 inches thick)

Bt2--45 to 60 inches; dark reddish brown (5YR 3/4) clay,
brown (7.5YR 5/4) dry; weak fine and medium subangular
blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky and plastic; many
very fine and fine tubular pores; few thin clay films on
peds; slightly acid (pH 6.2).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; about 1 mile south of
Carson and four miles northwest of Halfway in the
NW1/4NE1/4NE1/4 sec. 35, T. 7 S., R. 45 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
is 47 to 51 degrees F.  The soils are usually moist but dry
in all parts between 4 and 12 inches for 60 to 80 days
during the summer months.  Thickness of the mollic epipedon
is 10 to 20 inches.  Depth to bedrock ranges from 40 to
greater than 60 inches.  Base saturation by sum of cations
is 60 to 75 percent throughout.

The A horizon has hue of 7.5YR or 10YR, value of 2 or 3
moist, 3 or 4 dry and chroma of 2 moist, 2 through 4 dry.

The Bt horizon has hue of 5YR or 7.5YR, value of 3 moist, 4
or 5 dry and chroma of 2 through 4 moist, 4 dry.  It is
silty clay loam, silty clay or clay with 35 to 50 percent
clay.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the McNull and Wyant series.
The McNull soils are moderately deep.  The Wyant soils are
in a much more moist climate.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The soils are on footslopes, fans and
gently sloping terraces.  Slopes are 2 to 15 percent.
Elevations range from 2,500 to 3,600 feet.  The soils formed
in alluvium or colluvium.  The climate is subhumid with cold
wet winters and warm dry summers.  The mean annual
precipitation is 18 to 22 inches.  The mean annual
temperature is 45 to 48 degrees F.  The frost-free period is
100 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Top and
Langrell soils.  Top soils are adjacent to Applegate soils
but on steeper slopes on uplands at higher elevations.  Top
soils are pachic and have a frigid soil temperature regime.
Langrell soils formed in glaciolfluvial deposits adjacent to
the Applegate soils on nearly level outwash terraces.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow to medium
runoff; slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are used for hay
production, small grain and pasture.  The native vegetation
consists of scattered ponderosa pine and aspen with
snowberry and pinegrass understory.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northeastern Oregon.  The series
is inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County, Oregon, 1942.

ADDITIONAL DATA:  Reference sample number 83P 250-252;
S820R-001-005.  This data verifies ultic subgroup placement
but not fine family placement.

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
