LOCATION ELKWALOW               CO

Tentative Series
BWC/GB
04/1999

ELKWALOW SERIES

The Elkwalow series consists of deep, somewhat poorly or
moderately well drained soils formed in glacial till derived
from basalt.  Elkwalow soils are on mesa tops.  Slopes range
from 0 to 10 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is about 35
inches and mean annual temperature is about 34 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine, smectitic Oxyaquic Haplocryalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Elkwalow loam - Engelmann spruce-subalpine
fir woodland. (colors are for dry soil unless otherwise
noted.)

     Oi--1 to 0 inches; highly decomposed needles and twigs.

     A1--0 to 2 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) loam, very dark
grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate medium granular
structure; soft, very friable, nonsticky and nonplastic;
moderately acid (pH 5.8); clear smooth boundary.

     A2--2 to 8 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) silt loam, very
dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate medium
subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; moderately acid (pH
5.8); clear wavy boundary.  (Combined thickness is 4 to 10
inches)

     E--8 to 23 inches; pink (7.5YR 7/4) silt loam, brown
(7.5YR 5/4) moist; many fine and medium distinct strong
brown (7.5YR 5/6 and 5/8) redox concentrations in the
matrix, moist; weak medium and coarse subangular blocky
structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and
slightly plastic; 5 percent pebbles; strongly acid (pH 5.4);
abrupt wavy boundary.  (12 to 18 inches thick)

     Bt1--23 to 37 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) clay, dark
brown (7.5YR 3/4) moist; strong medium and coarse subangular
blocky structure; very hard, firm, sticky and very plastic;
many distinct clay films on ped faces; 5 percent
cobbles; neutral (pH 7.0); gradual irregular boundary.

     Bt2--37 to 46 inches; brown (7.5YR 5/4) cobbly clay,
dark brown (7.5YR 3/4) moist; strong medium and coarse
subangular blocky structure; very hard, firm, sticky and
very plastic; many distinct clay films on ped faces; 5
percent pebbles, 15 percent cobbles; neutral (pH 7.2);
abrupt irregular boundary.  (Combined thickness is 20 to 28
inches)

     2R--46 inches; basalt bedrock.

TYPE LOCATION:  Mesa County, Colorado; on Old Land's End
Road in the NW1/4 of Sec. 4, T. 12 S., R. 96 W.  Latitude:
39 degrees, 2 minutes, 22 seconds N.; Longitude:  108
degrees, 7 minutes, 33 seconds W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS: Mean annual soil temperature
ranges from 34 to 37 degrees F.  Average summer soil
temperature ranges from 42 to 45 degrees F.  The soil is
saturated with a perched water table at 1 to 3 feet for
30 days or more during the summer.  Mottling is at 8 to 24
inches.   Bedrock is at a depth of 40 to 60 inches.  The particle-size control section has 5 to 25 percent rock
fragments.

The A horizons have hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5
dry and 3 or 4 moist, and chroma of 2 or 3. Reaction is
moderately acid through neutral.

The E horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR.  Reaction is
strongly acid through neutral.

The Bt horizons have hue of 7.5YR or 5YR.  Reaction is
neutral or slightly acid.

COMPETING SERIES:  There are currently no other series in
this subgroup.  The Potlatch soils are similar but have
an aquic condition.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Elkwalow soils are on mesa tops.
Slopes range from  to 10 percent.  The soils formed in
glacial till derived from basalt.  Mean annual temperature
ranges from 33 to 35 degrees F., and mean annual
precipitation ranges from 30 to 40 inches.  Elevation ranges
from 9,900 to 10,700 feet.  The frost free period is 15 to
50 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the proposed
Grandmesa and Doughspon soils. Grandmesa soils are well
drained with bedrock between 20 to 40 inches.  Doughspon
soils have a thick mollic epipedon, lack an E horizon and
have  bedrock below 60 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Somewhat poorly or moderately
well drained; slow to medium runoff; slow permeability.  A
perched water table is at 1 to 3 feet for 30 or more days from May 15 to July 15.

USE AND VEGETATION:  This soil is used for timber
production, firewood, wildlife habitat, and recreation.
Dominant species are Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  West-central Colorado. The series
is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana

SERIES PROPOSED:  Mesa County (Grand Mesa-West Elk Soil
Survey Area) Colorado, 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic features in this soil include the
argillic horizon, the zone from 23 to 46 inches, and an
oxyaquic feature, saturated continuously for 30 days or
more fro May 15 to July 15.  Last updated by the state 4/93.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
