LOCATION NAGLE                  OR

Established Series
Rev. MHF/MGL/AON
10/2002

NAGLE SERIES

The Nagle series consists of deep, well drained soils with
moderately slow permeability on north slopes of dissected
terraces.  They formed in mixed alluvium with an influence
of loess in the surface horizons.  Slope ranges from 12 to
50 percent.  The mean annual temperature is about 43 degrees
F, and the mean annual precipitation is about 11 inches.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, frigid Pachic Argixerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Nagle silt loam - on a 16 percent slope,
rangeland.  (Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise
noted.)

A1--0 to 4 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) silt loam,
dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; weak fine and very fine
granular structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky and
slightly plastic; many very fine and fine roots; many fine
and very fine irregular pores; neutral (pH 7.0); clear
smooth boundary.  (4 to 7 inches thick)

A2--4 to 11 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) silt
loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; weak fine and
medium granular structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic; many very fine and fine roots; many
fine and very fine irregular pores; neutral (pH 7.2);
gradual smooth boundary.  (5 to 11 inches thick)

A3--11 to 18 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
silt loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; weak fine and
medium granular structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky,
slightly plastic; many very fine and fine roots; many fine
and very fine irregular pores; mildly alkaline (pH 7.6);
gradual wavy boundary.  (0 to 10 inches thick)

Bt--18 to 22 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
silty clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; moderate
medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common fine roots;
many fine and very fine tubular pores; few thin clay films
on faces of peds and in pores; moderately alkaline (pH 8.4);
clear wavy boundary.  (4 to 6 inches thick)

Btk--22 to 34 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) silty clay
loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; moderate medium subangular
blocky structure; hard, friable, sticky and plastic; common
fine roots; many very fine tubular pores; few thin clay
films on faces of peds and in pores; calcareous coatings on
faces of peds and in pores; 10 percent gravel; strongly
alkaline (pH 8.6); gradual wavy boundary.  (10 to 15 inches
thick)

2Bk--34 to 60 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) gravelly silty
clay loam, pale brown (10YR 6/3) dry; massive; hard,
friable, sticky and plastic; few roots; common fine and
medium tubular pores; calcareous coatings on faces of peds
and in pores; 25 percent gravel; strongly alkaline (pH 8.8).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; located 1,320 feet
east of the southwest corner in the SE1/4SE1/4SW1/4SW1/4,
sec. 11, T. 10 S., R. 40 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mollic epipedon is 20 to 35
inches thick and includes the upper part of the Bt.  Depth
to bedrock is greater than 60 inches and depth to secondary
lime ranges from 17 to 22 inches.  The mean annual soil
temperature is 43 to 47 degrees F.  The soils are usually
moist but are dry in all parts between 4 and 12 inches for
60 to 80 consecutive days during summer and early fall.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 2 or 3 moist and 4
or 5 dry, and chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It is neutral
or mildly alkaline.

The Bt horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 3 or 4 moist and 5
or 6 dry, and chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It is silty
clay loam, with 27 to 35 percent clay and 15 percent or more
fine sand or coarser.  Clay films range from few thin to
continuous thin on faces of peds and in pores.  It is
moderately or strongly alkaline.

The 2Bk horizon has hue of 10YR, value of 4 or 5 moist and 5
or 6 dry, and chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It is silty
clay loam or clay loam with 27 to 35 percent clay with 15 or
35 percent gravel.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Bly, Carey Lake, Dunford,
Hades, Sag, Strom and Tusk soils.  Bly and Carey Lake soils
are noncalcareous throughout.  Dunford soils are
noncalcareous and are 20 to 40 inches to bedrock.  Hades
soils have carbonates at greater than 54 inches, the solum
is over 50 inches thick and the mean annual soil temperature
is 40 to 43 degrees F.  Sag soils formed in loess and
colluvium from basalt and occur in a higher precipitation
zone.  Strom soils are somewhat poorly drained and have
mottles at 30 to 45 inches.  Tusk soils are noncalcareous.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Nagle soils are on north slopes of
dissected terraces.  Slopes range from 12 to 50 percent.
Elevation ranges from 3,000 to 4,500 feet.  The soils formed
in mixed alluvium with an influence of loess in the surface
horizons.  The climate is characterized by cold wet winters
and hot dry summers.  The mean annual temperature is 42 to
45 degrees F.  The mean annual precipitation is 9 to 12
inches.  The frost-free period is 80 to 110 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Encina and
Hibbard soils.  The Encina soils are on the south slopes of
dissected terraces and have more than 35 percent clay in the
Bt horizons.  The Hibbard soils have a duripan at 20 to 40
inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid
runoff; moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Nagle soils are used for rangeland.
The native vegetation is Idaho fescue, Sandberg bluegrass,
bluebunch wheatgrass, mountain big sagebrush and Wyoming big sagebrush.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Oregon.  The series is not extensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon, 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in
this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of 34 inches (A1, A2, A3, Bt and Btk horizons).

Pachic - mollic epipedon to a depth of 34 inches (A1, A2,
A3, Bt, and Btk horizons).

Argillic horizon - the zone from approximately 18 to 34
inches (Bt, Btk horizons).

These soils have a frigid soil temperature regime (43 to 47
degrees F).

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY
U.S.A.
