LOCATION CAPPS                  TX+OK

Established Series
Rev. CLG
10/2000

CAPPS SERIES

The Capps series consists of deep, well drained, moderately
permeable soils.  They formed in moderately fine texture
sediments that have been influenced by wind erosion.  They
are on nearly level to gently sloping uplands.  Slopes range
from 0 to 3 percent.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-loamy, mixed, superactive, mesic Aridic Haplustolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Capps clay loam - rangeland.
(Colors are for dry soil unless otherwise stated.)

A1-- 0 to 10 inches, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) clay
loam, very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) moist; moderate
medium and fine subangular blocky structure; hard, friable;
common fine roots; common fine pores; few wormcasts in lower
part; moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 12
inches thick)

A2--10 to 15 inches, brown (7.5YR 5/2) clay loam, dark
brown (7.5YR 3/2) moist; moderate medium and fine subangular
blocky structure; hard, friable; common fine roots and
pores; common wormcasts; calcareous, moderately alkaline;
gradual smooth boundary.  (4 to 20 inches thick)

Bw--15 to 22 inches, pinkish gray (7.5YR 6/2) clay loam;
brown (7.5YR 4/2) moist; weak fine subangular blocky and
fine granular structure; slightly hard, very friable; few
fine roots; common fine pores; few medium calcium carbonate concretions; 25 percent by volume wormcasts; calcareous,
moderately alkaline; gradual smooth boundary.  (6 to 20
inches thick)

Bk--22 to 35 inches, light brown (7.5YR 6/4) clay loam,
brown (7.5YR 5/4) moist; weak very fine subangular blocky
structure; slightly hard, friable; common fine pores; 5
percent by volume of soft white calcium carbonate bodies;
calcareous, moderately alkaline; clear smooth boundary.  (10
to 30 inches thick)

Ck--35 to 60 inches, light reddish brown (5YR 6/3) clay
loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; massive; slightly hard,
friable; approximately 40 percent calcium carbonate as very
fine and fine concretions and soft bodies; calcareous,
moderately alkaline.

TYPE LOCATION:  Moore County, Texas.  In rangeland 950 feet
north and 225 feet east of the southwest corner of section
198, block 44, this point being 3 miles west and 2 miles
south of the southwest corner of Dumas.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Thickness of the solum ranges
from 30 to 60 inches.  Depth to the zone of carbonate
accumulation ranges from 20 to 40 inches.  Depth to free
calcium carbonate ranges from 7 to 24 inches.  The 10- to
40-inch control section ranges from loam to clay loam with
clay content ranging from 25 to 35 percent and with more
than 15 percent sand coarser than very fine sand.

The A horizon is brown to dark grayish brown with hue of
7.5YR or 10YR, value of 3 or 4 and chromas of 2 or 3.
Thickness of the A horizon with moist values and chromas of
less than 3.5 ranges from 10 to 20 inches.  The A horizon is
fine sandy loam, loam, or clay loam, and mildly or
moderately alkaline.

The B horizon is grayish brown to pinkish gray in hue of
7.5YR or 10YR, value of 5 through 7, and chromas of 2
through 4.  It is loam or clay loam.

The Ck horizon is white, light gray, gray, pinkish gray,
pink, light reddish brown, or light brown in hue of 5YR
through 10YR.  The amount of carbonates in the Ck horizon
ranges from about 20 to 60 percent by volume.  The zone of
carbonate accumulation extends to below 60 inches in most
pedons.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Chugter, Haynes, Nucla,
Ortiz, Paloduro, Penden, Shirk, and Zita series.  Chugter
soils have a solum in hues of 5YR or 2.5YR.  Haynes, Nucla,
and Penden soils are calcareous throughout.  Nucla soils
also have thinner sola.  Ortiz and Shirk soils have shale at
depths of 20 to 40 inches.  Paloduro and Zita soils have
average annual soil temperatures higher than 59 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Capps soils are on nearly level to
gently sloping uplands with concave to weakly convex
surfaces.  Slope gradients range from less than 0.5 percent
to 3 percent.  The soils formed in eolian or eolian altered lacustrine deposits.  The climate is semiarid to dry
subhumid; mean annual precipitation is 17 to 22 inches; and
the Thornthwaite P-E indices are 28 to 34.  The mean annual temperature ranges from 55 degrees to 57 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Conlen,
Dumas, Gruver, Sherm, and Sunray series.  Conlen and Sunray
soils are calcareous throughout.  Dumas, Gruver, and Sherm
soils have Bt horizons

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; very slow runoff;
moderate permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Mainly cultivated and used for growing
wheat and grain sorghums.  Native vegetation is midgrasses,
such as sideoats, blue grama, and buffalograss.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northern High Plains of Texas and
Oklahoma.  The series is moderately extensive with 40 to 50
thousand acres.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Temple, Texas

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Moore County, Texas; 1971.

REMARKS:  These soils were formerly included in the Zita
series and they classified in the Chestnut great soil
group..  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in this
pedon are: Mollic epipedon 0 to 15 inches, Cambic horizon 15
to 22 inches, Calcic horizon 22 to 35 inches.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
