LOCATION CLOVERCREEK            OR

Established Series
Rev. WEL/TDT
01/2023

CLOVERCREEK SERIES

The Clovercreek series consist of shallow, well drained
soils on hills.  They have formed in colluvium and residuum
derived from greenstone.  Slopes are 2 to 35 percent.  The
mean annual precipitation is about 14 inches, and the mean
annual temperature is about 48 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Loamy-skeletal, mixed, superactive, mesic Lithic Argixerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Clovercreek very gravelly loam, rangeland.
(Colors are for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

A1--0 to 3 inches; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) very
gravelly loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; moderate
fine and medium granular structure; soft, friable, nonsticky
and nonplastic; common very fine and fine roots; common very
fine irregular pores; 40 percent gravel; neutral (pH 6.8);
clear smooth boundary.  (2 to 4 inches thick)

A2--3 to 6 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
gravelly loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry; moderate very
fine and fine subangular blocky structure parting to
moderate and fine granular; soft, friable, nonsticky and
nonplastic; common very fine and fine roots; common very
fine irregular and tubular pores; 25 percent gravel; neutral
(pH 7.0); clear wavy boundary.  (2 to 5 inches thick)

Bt1--6 to 10 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
very gravelly clay loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2) dry;
strong fine and medium subangular blocky structure; slightly
hard, firm, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few very
fine and fine roots; few very fine tubular pores; few thin
clay films on ped faces; 40 percent gravel; neutral (pH
7.2); clear wavy boundary.  (3 to 5 inches thick)

Bt2--10 to 16 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) very
gravelly clay loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; strong fine and
medium subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, firm,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few very fine roots;
few very fine tubular pores; few thin clay films on ped
faces and lining pores; about 55 percent gravel; neutral (pH
7.2); abrupt wavy boundary.  (3 to 7 inches thick)

R--16 inches; fractured greenstone.

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; 2,300 feet south and
700 feet east of the NW corner of sec. 3, in the SW1/4NW1/4,
T. 8 S., R. 42 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  These soils are usually moist but
are dry in all parts between 4 and 12 inches for 60 to 80
consecutive days during the summer.  The mean annual soil
temperature is 47 to 50 degrees F.  Depth to bedrock and
solum thickness is 14 to 20 inches.  Thickness of the mollic
epipedon is 7 to 14 inches and includes part of the argillic
horizon.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 4 or 5 dry, and
chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  They have 20 to 50 percent
gravel and 0 to 5 percent cobbles.

The upper part of the Bt horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist,
4 or 5 dry, and chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  The lower
part has value of 4 moist, and 5 or 6 dry, and chroma of 3
or 4 moist and dry.  It is clay loam or silty clay loam with
27 to 35 percent clay, 35 to 60 percent gravel and 0 to 10
percent cobbles.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Brier, Duco, Gwin, and Reywat series. Brier soils are moist for 10 to 20 cumulative days
during July to October.  Duco soils have an aridic moisture
regime and mean annual soil temperature of 50 to 53 degrees F.
Gwin soils are dominated by basalt cobble size fragments
throughout the profile and mollic colors extend throughout
the argillic horizon to bedrock. Reywat soils have an aridic
moisture regime.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Clovercreek soils are on hills with
slopes of 2 to 35 percent.  They are on ridge tops and
convex south-facing slopes.  Elevations range from 3,000 to
3,800 feet.  These soils formed in colluvium and residuum
derived from greenstone.  The mean annual precipitation is
12 to 16 inches.  The mean annual temperature is 45 to 50
degrees F.  The frost-free period is 100 to 130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Keating and
Ridley soils.  The Keating soils are moderately deep and
nonskeletal.  The Ridley soils are deep, have a mollic
epipedon over 20 inches thick, are in the fine family and
occur in concave or swale positions.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow to medium
runoff; moderately slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used for rangeland.  The native
vegetation is mainly Idaho fescue, bluebunch wheatgrass,
Sandberg bluegrass, mountain big sagebrush, antelope
bitterbrush, and wild crab apple.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Eastern Oregon.  The soils are
inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features recognized in
this pedon are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 10 inches (A1, A2, Bt1 horizons).

Argillic horizon - the zone from approximately 6 to 16
inches (Bt1, Bt2 horizons).

Lithic feature - hard bedrock at 16 inches.

Xeric feature - a moisture control section that is usually
moist, but dry for 60 to 80 consecutive days during the
summer.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
