LOCATION WINGDALE               OR

Established Series
Rev. MHF/WEL/TDT
02/1999

WINGDALE SERIES

The Wingdale series consists of very deep, poorly drained soils
that formed in mixed alluvium with volcanic ash and loess in
the surface layers.  They are on flood plains and have
slopes of 0 to 2 percent.  The mean annual precipitation is
about 11 inches, and the mean annual air temperature is
about 48 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Fine-silty, mixed, superactive, calcareous, mesic Cumulic Endoaquolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Wingdale silt loam, pasture.  (Colors are
for moist soil unless otherwise noted.

    Ak1--0 to 6 inches; black (10YR 2/1) silt loam, dark
gray (10YR 4/1) dry; moderate very fine subangular blocky
structure parting to weak fine granular; soft, friable,
slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many very fine and
fine roots; common very fine and fine irregular pores;
strongly effervescent; strongly alkaline (pH 8.6); clear
smooth boundary.  (3 to 10 inches thick)

    Ak2--6 to 11 inches; black (10YR 2/1) silt loam, dark
gray (10YR 4/1) dry; few fine distinct yellowish brown (10YR
5/4) redox concentrations; moderate very fine and fine subangular blocky structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine tubular pores; strongly effervescent; strongly alkaline (pH 8.6); clear smooth boundary.  (3 to 7 inches thick)

    Ak3--11 to 23 inches; very dark gray (10YR 3/1) silt
loam, dark gray (10YR 4/1) dry; common fine distinct reddish
brown (5YR 4/4) redox concentrations; moderate very fine and fine subangular blocky structure; soft, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine tubular pores; slightly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.0); clear smooth boundary.  (8 to 13 inches thick)

    AC--23 to 34 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
silt loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry; many medium
distinct reddish brown (5YR 4/4) redox concentrations; moderate very fine and fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; common very fine and fine roots; common very fine and fine tubular pores; slightly alkaline (pH 7.8); gradual smooth boundary. (6 to 12 inches thick)

    Cg1--34 to 49 inches; dark grayish brown (2.5Y 4/2)
silty clay loam, grayish brown (2.5Y 5/2) dry; many medium
distinct reddish brown (5YR 4/4) redox concentrations; massive; slightly hard, firm, sticky and plastic; few fine roots; common very fine tubular pores; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); gradual smooth boundary.  (10 to 20 inches thick)

    2Cg2--49 to 60 inches; dark gray (5Y 4/1) gravelly silty
clay loam, gray (5Y 6/1) dry; common medium distinct light
olive brown (2.5Y 5/4) redox concentrations; massive; slightly hard, firm, sticky and plastic; few very fine tubular pores; 20 percent gravel; slightly alkaline (pH 7.4).

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; about 3/4 mile
southeast of the Keating community and 75 feet north of the
Powder River in the SW1/4NW1/4SW1/4 sec. 16, T. 8 S., R. 42
E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
ranges from 47 to 52 degrees F.  The soil is saturated
throughout from March to May.  The 10 to 40 inch control
section is silt loam, or silty clay loam, with 22 to 35
percent clay, and less than 15 percent coarser than very
fine sand.  Depth to redox concentrations is 3 to 10 inches.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist and 4 or 5 dry and
chroma of 1 or 2 moist and dry.  Soil reaction ranges from
moderately to strongly alkaline with slight or strong
effervescence.

The Cg horizon has hue of 10YR or 2.5Y.  It is silt loam, or
silty clay loam.  It is moderately or slightly alkaline.

The 2C horizon has hue of 2.5Y or 5Y.  It is silty clay loam
or silt loam, with 0 to 30 percent gravel.  In some pedons
there are thin lenses of stratified sand.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Badus, Calco, Devilsgait,
Lamo and Salmo series.  These soils lack a seasonal dry
period during the summer and lack influence of ash in any
part of their profiles.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Wingdale soils are on flood plains.
Slopes are 0 to 2 percent.  Elevations range from 2,200 to
3,400 feet.  They formed in recent alluvium and have an
influence of volcanic ash and loess in the surface horizons.
The mean annual precipitation is 9 to 14 inches.  The mean
annual air temperature is from 45 to 52 degrees F, and the
frost-free period is 90 to 140 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Baldock,
Balm, Boyce, and Wingville soils.  The Baldock soils lack a
mollic epipedon.  The Boyce and Balm soils are underlain
with sands and gravel at depths of 20 to 40 inches.  The
Wingville soils are somewhat poorly drained and are on
adjacent low terraces.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Poorly drained; slow or very
slow runoff; permeability is moderately slow.  The soil has occasional flooding and a high water table from 0 to 18
inches from March to May.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Wingdale soils are used mainly for hay
and pasture.  The native vegetation is mainly Nebraska
sedge, baltic rush and willow.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Valleys of eastern Oregon.  The
series is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon, 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of 34 inches.

Cumulic - an irregular decrease in organic matter with
depth.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
