LOCATION HUDSPETH               OR

Established Series
Rev. MHF/TDT
01/2023

HUDSPETH SERIES

The Hudspeth series consists of moderately deep, well
drained soils on side slopes of mountains.  They formed in
colluvium from tuffaceous sediments over metamorphic
bedrock.  Slopes are 12 to 60 percent.  The mean annual
precipitation is about 25 inches and the mean annual
temperature is about 43 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Clayey-skeletal, smectitic, frigid Ultic Palexerolls

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hudspeth very stony clay loam - on a 55
percent convex south-facing slope, woodland.  (Colors are
for moist soil unless otherwise noted.)

O--1 inch to 0; partially decomposed pine needles,
leaves, and twigs.

A--0 to 7 inches; very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2)
very stony clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) dry;
moderate fine subangular blocky structure; slightly hard,
firm, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; many very fine
and fine and few medium roots; many very fine and fine
tubular pores; 25 percent stones, 10 percent cobbles, and 15
percent gravel; slightly acid (pH 6.4); abrupt smooth
boundary.  (5 to 15 inches thick)

2Bt1--7 to 16 inches; dark brown (10YR 3/3) very
gravelly clay, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; strong medium angular
blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very sticky and very
plastic; few medium roots; common very fine discontinuous
tubular pores; many thick dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4)
clay films on ped faces and in pores; 40 percent gravel and
10 percent cobbles; neutral (pH 6.6); gradual smooth
boundary.  (5 to 10 inches thick)

2Bt2--16 to 27 inches; dark brown (10YR 4/3) very
gravelly clay, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; strong medium and
coarse angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very
sticky and very plastic; few medium roots; common very fine discontinuous tubular pores; continuous thick dark yellowish
brown (10YR 4/4) clay films on ped faces and in pores; 40
percent gravel and 10 percent cobbles; neutral (pH 6.6);
gradual smooth boundary.  (10 to 15 inches thick)

2Bt3--27 to 34 inches; dark yellowish brown (10YR 4/4)
extremely gravelly clay, yellowish brown (10YR 5/4) dry;
strong coarse prismatic structure; very hard, very firm,
very sticky and very plastic; no roots; few very fine
discontinuous tubular pores; many thick dark yellowish brown
(10YR 4/4) clay films on ped faces and in pores; 50 percent
gravel and 15 percent cobbles; neutral (pH 6.8).  (0 to 7
inches thick)

3R--34 inches; fractured argillite.

TYPE LOCATION:  Baker County, Oregon; NE1/4NE1/4SW1/4 of
sec. 17, T. 11 S., R. 37 E.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature
ranges from 42 to 47 degrees F.  The soils are usually moist
but are dry between depth of 4 and 12 inches for 60 to 80
consecutive days during the summer.  Depth to a lithic
contact is 20 to 40 inches.  Depth to the 2Bt is 5 to 15
inches.  Coarse fragments range from 35 to 80 percent in the
control section.  Thickness of the mollic epipedon is 10 to
20 inches.  The solum ranges from slightly acid to neutral.

The A horizon has value of 2 or 3 moist, 4 or 5 dry and
chroma of 2 or 3 moist and dry.  It has 15 to 30 percent
stones, 10 to 15 percent cobbles and 10 to 20 percent
gravel.

The 2Bt horizon has value of 3 through 5 moist, 5 or 6 dry
and chroma of 3 or 4 moist and dry.  It is clay or silty
clay, averaging 50 to 60 percent clay.  It has 40 to 50
percent gravel and 10 to 20 percent cobbles or stones.  It
has moderate or strong angular or subangular blocky
structure grading to moderate or strong prismatic.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Boiler and Player series.
Boiler soils are deeper than 40 inches to bedrock.  Player
soils are greater than 60 inches deep to bedrock.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hudspeth soils are on side slopes of
forested areas.  Slopes are 12 to 60 percent.  Elevations
range from 4,000 to 5,700 feet.  The soils formed in
colluvium from tuffaceous sediments over metamorphic
bedrock.  The mean annual precipitation is 16 to 30 inches.
The mean annual temperature is 40 to 45 degrees F.  The
frost-free period is 50 to 90 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Derringer,
Hankins, Harlow, Morningstar and the competing Boiler soils.  Derringer soils are 20 to 40 inches deep to bedrock.
Hankins and Morningstar soils are greater than 40 inches
deep to bedrock.  Boiler soils are on adjacent north slopes.
Hankins soils are nonskeletal.  Morningstar soils are
loamy-skeletal.  Harlow soils are 10 to 20 inches deep to a
lithic contact.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained.  Runoff is medium
to rapid.  Permeability is slow.

USE AND VEGETATION:  These soils are used mainly for
rangeland and wildlife habitat.  The vegetation is mainly
curlleaf mountainmahogany, western juniper, scattered
ponderosa pine, mountain big sagebrush, bitterbrush, wild crab
apple, wax currant, bluebunch wheatgrass, Sandberg
bluegrass, along with minor amounts of elk sedge, pinegrass,
Idaho fescue and arrowleaf balsamroot.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Mountainous areas of eastern
Oregon.  The series is of moderate extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Portland, Oregon

SERIES ESTABLISHED:  Baker County Area, Oregon; 1988.

REMARKS:  Diagnostic horizons and features in this pedon
are:

Mollic epipedon - the zone from the surface of the soil to a
depth of approximately 16 inches (A, 2Bt1 horizons).

Argillic horizon - the zone from approximately 7 to 34
inches (2Bt1, 2Bt2, 2Bt3 horizons).

"Pale" feature - argillic horizon with clayey particle-size
class and abrupt upper boundary (2Bt1 horizon).

Ultic feature - base saturation of between 60 and 75 percent
either throughout the entire argillic horizon or in the
upper 20 inches of the argillic horizon, whichever is
thinner.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
