LOCATION HUTT                   WY

Inactive Series
WGE-CJF-CJH
01/2000

HUTT SERIES

The Hutt series are on floodplains and alluvial fans.  They formed in clayey deposits washed from weathered calcareous and gypsiferous shale.  Slope ranges from 0 to 6 percent.  Average annual air temperature is about 47 degrees and annual precipitation is about 16 inches. 

TAXONOMIC CLASS:  very-fine, smectitic, calcareous, mesic Ustertic Torriorthents

TYPICAL PEDON:  Hutt clay loam - rangeland. (Colors are for air dry soil unless otherwise noted)

	A--0 to 4 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) clay loam, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak fine platy that parts to weak fine granular structure; hard, firm, sticky, and plastic; many very fine, fine, and medium roots; slightly effervescent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.6); abrupt smooth boundary.  (2 to 6 inches thick)

	AC--4 to 12 inches; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) clay, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak coarse angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very sticky, plastic; few very fine, fine, and medium roots; slightly effervescent; slightly alkaline (pH 7.7); clear smooth boundary.  (4 to 8 inches thick)

 	C1--12 to 22 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) clay, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; weak coarse angular blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very sticky, plastic; few very fine and fine roots; strongly effervescent; moderately alkaline (pH 8.3); clear smooth boundary.  (10 to 16 inches thick)

	C2--22 to 60 inches; light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) clay, dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2) moist; massive; very hard, very firm, very sticky, plastic; strongly effervescent; lime and gypsum in rounded masses, threads and seams; moderately alkaline (pH 8.3).

TYPE LOCATION:  Crook County, Wyoming; NW1/4, SE1/4 of Sec. 23, T57N, R62W.

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  The mean annual soil temperature is 47 degrees to
52 degrees F.  The mean summer temperature is 58 degrees to 65 degrees F.
These soils are usually calcareous throughout, but some pedons are leached a
few inches.  The 10 to 40 inch control section is clay and averages between
60 and 70 percent clay.  Consistence is hard or very hard.  When the soil is
dry, cracks one-half to one inch and several feet long extend downward 20
inches or more.

The A horizon has hue of 5Y, 2.5Y or 10YR, value of 5 to 7 and 3 to 5 moist, and chroma of 1 or 2.

The C horizon has hue of 5Y, 2.5Y or 10YR, value of 5 to 7 and 4 or 5 moist,
and chroma of 1 or 2.  Dark soil color is related to the parent material weathered from bedded shale.

COMPETING SERIES:  This is the Rana series.  Rana series have 5YR or redder hue throughout. 

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  Hutt soils are on nearly level floodplains or gently
sloping alluvial fans.  Slopes are 0 to 6 percent.  They form in uniform
clay deposits washed from weathered calcareous and gypsiferous shale.  The
average annual precipitation is 14 to 18 inches, most of which falls during
spring and early summer.  The mean annual temperature is 45 degrees to 50
degrees F.  Elevation is 3,200 to 5,000 feet.  Frost-free season is 110 to
130 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Gaynor, Limon, Louviers and
Samsil soils.  Gaynor soils are acid and have paralithic contact at 20 to 40
inches.  Louviers and Samsil soils have paralithic contact at 10 to 20
inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; slow runoff; very slow
permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  Used as rangeland, hayland, and wildlife habitat.
Native vegetation consists of western wheatgrass, green needlegrass, and
cheatgrass.  Hayland is usually native vegetation that is irrigated by
water-spreading systems.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  Northeastern Wyoming.  The series is inextensive.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: St. Paul, Minnesota.

SERIES PROPOSED:  Crook County, Wyoming; 1973.  The name is a coined name.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
