LOCATION MUDBUZ                 CO

Tentative Series
Rev. BWC/GB
02/1999

MUDBUZ SERIES

The Mudbuz soils consist of very deep, well drained soils on
mountain side slopes.  These soils formed in residuum and
colluvium derived from interbedded sandstone and shale.
Slope is 10 to 40 percent.  Mean annual precipitation is
about 32 inches, and mean annual temperature is 36 degrees F.

TAXONOMIC CLASS: Clayey-skeletal, smectitic Typic Haplocryalfs

TYPICAL PEDON:  Mudbuz loam - mixed aspen-spruce woodland.
(colors are for dry soil unless otherwise noted.)

    Oi--1 to 0 inches; partly decomposed leaves, and
needles.

    A--0 to 5 inches; brown (10YR 4/3) loam, very dark gray
(10YR 3/1) moist; moderate fine granular structure; soft,
friable, slightly sticky and nonplastic; 5 percent pebbles;
neutral (pH 7.0); clear irregular boundary.  (3 to 6 inches
thick)

    BA--5 to 11 inches; brown (7.5YR 4/4) cobbly clay loam,
brown (10YR 4/3) moist; weak coarse subangular blocks
parting to weak medium granular structure; slightly hard,
friable, slightly sticky and slightly plastic; few faint
clay films on ped faces; 10 percent pebbles, 15 percent
cobbles; slightly acid (pH 6.4); clear smooth boundary.  (4
to 8 inches thick)

    Bt1--11 to 26 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) very
cobbly clay, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; common very dark
grayish brown (10YR 3/2) organic stains; moderate coarse
subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very
sticky and very plastic; common distinct clay films on ped
faces and in pores; 10 percent pebbles, 25 percent cobbles,
5 percent stones; slightly acid (pH 6.2); gradual
wavy boundary.

    Bt2--26 to 38 inches; light brown (7.5YR 6/4) very
cobbly clay, brown (7.5YR 4/4) moist; strong coarse
subangular blocky structure; very hard, very firm, very
sticky and very plastic; common distinct clay films on ped
faces and in pores; 15 percent pebbles, 30 percent cobbles,
5 percent stones; slightly acid (pH 6.2), gradual wavy
boundary.  (combined thickness of the Bt is 18 to 30 inches)

    C--38 to 60 inches; pink (7.5YR 7/4) very cobbly clay
loam, reddish brown (5YR 4/4) moist; massive; very hard,
very firm, very sticky and very plastic; 5 percent pebbles,
30 percent cobbles, 10 percent stones; slightly acid (pH
6.2).

TYPE LOCATION:  Delta County, Colorado; in the northwest
quarter of the southeast quarter of Sec. 19, T. 11 S., R. 91
W.  (Latitude:  39 degrees, 5 minutes, 21 seconds;
longitude:  107 degrees, 35 minutes, 27 seconds.)

RANGE IN CHARACTERISTICS:  Mean annual soil temperature
ranges from 37 to 40 degrees.  Mean annual summer soil
temperature is 41 to 46 degrees F.  The mollic epipedon is 4
to 9 inches thick.  Depth to the base of the argillic
horizon is 25 to 44 inches.  Rock fragments range from 35 to
50 percent in the particle-size control section.  The
moisture control section is usually moist, when the soil
temperature is greater than 41 degrees F.

The A horizon has hue of 10YR or 7.5YR, value of 4 or 5 dry,
2 or 3 moist, and chroma of 1 through 3.  Reaction is
neutral or slightly acid.

In the Bt horizon, texture is very cobbly to extremely stony
clay loam or clay.  Clay content is 35 to 50 percent.  Hue
is 10YR through 5YR, value of 5 or 6 dry, 4 or 5 moist, with
chroma of 3 or 4.  Reaction is neutral to slightly acid.

In the C horizon, hue is 10YR through 5YR, value is 6 or 7
dry, 4 through 6 moist, and chroma of 3 or 4.  Reaction is
moderately acid through neutral.

COMPETING SERIES:  These are the Cluff (UT), Cochedome
(T)(CO), Reck (T)(ID), Recklor (UT), Winz (NV), and Yence
(UT) series.  The Cluff and Winz series have an E horizon or
a B/E horizon and are deeper to the base of the Bt horizon. Cochedome soils have lithic bedrock above 40 inches.  The
Reck and Recklor series are dry in some part of the
moisture control section for some time in most years when
the temperature at 20 inches is greater than 41 degrees F.
The Yence soils have warmer mean annual soil temperatures
that range from 41 to 43 degrees F.

GEOGRAPHIC SETTING:  The Mudbuz soils are on mountain side
slopes.  These soils formed in residuum and colluvium
derived from interbedded sandstone and shale.  Slopes range
from 10 to 40 percent.  Elevation ranges from 8,500 to
10,500 feet.  Mean annual precipitation is 25 to 40 inches.
The mean annual temperature is 34 to 39 degrees F.  The
frost-free period is less than 70 days.

GEOGRAPHICALLY ASSOCIATED SOILS:  These are the Wesdy and
Wetopa soils.  Wesdy soils have mollic epipedons 10 to 16
inches thick.  Wetopa soils have less than 35 percent coarse fragments in the control section and have mollic epipedons
thicker than 16 inches.

DRAINAGE AND PERMEABILITY:  Well drained; medium to rapid
runoff; moderately slow to slow permeability.

USE AND VEGETATION:  This soil is used for timber
production, livestock grazing, and wildlife habitat.  In
Colorado it is in the Engelmann Spruce-Subalpine Fir
woodland site.

DISTRIBUTION AND EXTENT:  West central Colorado.  The series
is of small extent.

MLRA SOIL SURVEY REGIONAL OFFICE (MO) RESPONSIBLE: Bozeman, Montana

SERIES PROPOSED:  Grand Mesa-West Elk Soil Survey Area,
Delta County, Colorado, 1988.

REMARKS:  The name is coined from the Muddy and the Buzzard
Creeks.  This soil is the second component in map unit 358.  Diagnostic features include:  Argillic horizon, the zone
from 11 to 38 inches.
Last updated by the state 4/93.  Classification is changed
in this revision from mixed to montmorillonitic mineralogy
based on NSSL data.

National Cooperative Soil Survey
U.S.A.
